here are bernard shaw judy woodruff bill
schneider and ken bode the 1996
presidential campaign converges in san
diego tonight for the last of two
presidential debates for the republicans
it is a return to the city that hosted
their convention for the democrats it's
a return to a must-win electoral vote
state california the university of san
diego is a site for this town hall forum
just 20 days before the election this is
the last chance for voters to make a
side-by-side comparison of these
candidates bob dole has gained ground in
the polls recently and he needs a strong
showing tonight to continue that trend
one thing to watch for how hard he hits
the character issue and how effectively
president clinton responds now bill
your thoughts well bob dole was on the
defensive in the first debate about ten
days ago
because clinton challenged him to
explain how he was going to cut taxes
without making big cuts in medicare
tonight i think dole has got to make
sure this election is about bill clinton
the question is do the voters want to
fire him don't has to convince them they
do you cannot do that without going
negative ken bode well there is
speculation that bob dole begin by
attacking the character issue in his
opening statement that will be the most
telling moment and here on the stage at
the university of san diego town hall
forum the debate begins from the shiley
theater at the university of san diego
san diego california i'm jim lehrer of
the newshour on pbs welcome to this
second 1996 presidential debate between
senator bob dole the republican nominee
and president bill clinton the
democratic nominee it is sponsored by
the commission on presidential debates
we will follow a town hall table format
tonight the questions over the next 90
minutes will come from 113 citizens of
the greater san diego area they were
chosen in the past week by the gallup
organization to represent a rough
cross-section of voters as to political
views age gender and other factors each
said he or she is undecided about this
presidential race they were told to come
tonight with question
nobody from the debate commission or the
two campaigns has any idea of what those
questions are neither do i we will all
be hearing them for the first time at
the same time i met with this group
three hours ago and we spoke only about
how it was going to work tonight they
are sitting in five sections i will call
on individuals at random moving from one
section to another with each new
question alternating the questions
between the two candidates my job is to
keep things fair and the subjects as
clear and as varied as possible the
rules drawn by the campaigns are
basically the same as they were for the
hartford in st petersburg debates 90
second answers 60 second rebuttals 30
second responses for each question the
candidates are not allowed to question
each other directly there will be two
minute opening and closing statements
the order for this evening was set by
coin toss we begin now with senator dole
and his opening statement senator dole
thank you very much again let me first
give you a sports update the braves won
cardinals nothing
early on i want to thank you and i want
to thank everybody here tonight i want a
special thanks to my wife elizabeth my
daughter robin for their love and
support and thank the people who are
listening or watching me watching all
over america in 20 days you will help
decide who will lead this country into
the next century
it's an awesome responsibility and you
must ask yourself you know enough about
the candidates used to know as much as
possible about each of us sometimes the
views have been distorted and millions
and millions of negative dollars and
negative advertising spent distorting my
views but i hope tonight you'll get a
better feel of who bob dole is and what
he's all about and i think first you
should i should understand that question
on your mind is do i understand your
problem what i understand that it
occurred to me and i might just say that
i'm from the large family i got lots of
relatives and their good average
middle-class hard-working americans they
live all across the country they're not
all republicans maybe all but one than
any event i understand the problems well
there's two parents working because one
has to pay the taxes and one has to
provide for the family whether it's a
single parent who just barely pays the
pressing bills or whether you're worried
about an education for your children
we're going to the best schools or
whether you worried about safe
playgrounds drug-free schools
crime free schools this is what this
election is all about and hopefully
neither when we conclude this debate you
will have a better understanding and the
viewing and listening audience will have
a better understanding thank you mr
two minutes open you snake i was going
to party
well thank you jim and thanks to the
people of san diego for giving us this
opportunity to have another discussion
about the decision we all face in front
of people who will make the decision
again i will say i'll do my best to make
this a discussion of ideas and issues
not insults
what really matters is what happens to
your future and what happens to our
country as we stand on the brink of a
new century a time of extraordinary
possibility i have a simple philosophy
that i tried to follow for the last four
years do what creates opportunity for
all what reinforces responsibility from
all of us and what will help us build a
community where everybody's got a role
to play and a place at the table
compared to four years ago we're clearly
better off we've got ten and a half
million more jobs the desk that's been
reduced by 60 percent incomes are rising
for the first time in a decade the crime
rates the welfare rolls are falling
we're putting a hundred thousand more
police on the street 60,000 felons
fugitives and stalkers have been denied
handguns but that progress is only the
beginning what we really should focus on
tonight is what we still have to do to
help the american people make the most
of this future that's out there i think
what really matters is what we can do to
help build strong families strong
families need a strong economy to me
that means we have to go on and balance
this budget while we protect medicare
and medicaid and education in the
environment we should give a tax cut
targeted the child rearing and education
to buying a first home and paying for
health care we ought to help protect our
kids from drugs and guns and gangs and
tobacco we ought to help move a million
people from welfare to work and we ought
to create the finest education system in
the world where every eighteen-year-old
can go on to college and all of our
younger children have great educational
opportunities if we do those things we
can build that bridge to the 21st
century that's what i hope you get to
talk about tonight thank you all right
let's go now to the first question from
this section and it's for senator dole
yes ma'am yep hello senator dole my name
is shannon mcafee i'm a beginning
educator in this country and i really
think it's important what children have
to say they're still very idealistic and
the everything they say comes from the
heart i have a quote for you from if i
were president compiled by peggy gavin a
sixth grader says if i would press if i
were president i would think about
abraham lincoln and george washington
and what they did to make our country
great we should unite the white and
black people and people of all cultures
democrats and republicans should unite
also we should all come together and
think of the best ways to solve the
economic problems of our country i
believe that when we are able to come
together and stop fighting amongst
ourselves we will get along a lot better
these are the ideals and morals that we
are teach we are trying to teach our
children in these days yet we don't seem
to be practicing them in our government
in anything if you are president how
will you begin to practice what we are
preaching to our children the future of
our nation well i would say first of all
i think it's a very good question i
appreciate the quote from the young man
there's no doubt about it that many
american people have lost their faith in
government they see scandals almost on a
daily basis they see ethical problems in
the white house today they see 900 fbi
files private person being gathered up
by somebody in a white house nobody
knows who hired this man so there's a
great deal of cynicism out there but
i've always tried and whatever i've done
is to bring people together i said in my
acceptance speech in san diego about two
months ago that the exits are clearly
marked if you think the republican party
is some place for you to come if you're
narrow-minded or bigoted or don't like
certain people in america the exits are
for you to walk out of as i stand here
without compromise because this is the
party of lincoln i think we have a real
obligation obviously public officials
i'm no longer a public official i left
public life on june the 11th of this
year but it is very important young
people are looking to us they're looking
to us for leadership they're watching
what we do what we say what we promise
and what we finally deliver and i would
think seems to me that there are
opportunities here when i'm president i
will keep my word
my word is my bond rosen
one of the reasons that i ran for
president sandy is because not just
children a lot of grown-ups felt that
way if you remember four years ago we
had not only rising unemployment but a
lot of rising cynicism i've never worked
in washington as an elected official it
seemed to me that most of the arguments
were partisan a republican democrat
left-right liberal conservative that's
why i said the nighttime for opportunity
responsibility and community and we've
gotten some real progress in the last
four years i've also done everything i
could at every moment of division in
this country after oklahoma city when
these churches were burned to bring
people together and remind people that
we are stronger because of our diversity
we have to respect one another
you mentioned washington and lincoln
they were presidents at historic times
this is an historic time it's important
that we go beyond those old partisan
arguments and focus on people and their
future when we do that instead of
shutting the government down over a
partisan fight on the budget we're a
better country and that's why we're
making progress now senator well
bringing people together again it's
obviously a responsibility we all have
enogh you do it everybody here does it
you do a lot of things nobody knows
about i have a little foundation for the
disabled called the dole foundation
we've raised about 10 million dollars we
don't talk about it we try to help
people with disabilities
bring them back into the mainstream of
public life so it seems to me that
there's also a public trust when you're
the president of states you have a
public trust you have to keep that
public trust as george washington as
abraham lincoln did and i think now that
trust is being violated and it seems to
me we ought to face up to it and the
president ought to say tonight but he's
not gonna pardon anybody he was involved
in business with who might implicate him
later on all right the next question
from this section right here right there
in the middle sir yes sir dr robert
berkley i'm a cardiologist from
fallbrook california mr president i'd
like to know if you'd please explain
your plans for in a substitute fashion
for addressing the problems with the
healthcare system in our country
i will first of all let me say what we
have done in the last four years we've
worked hard to promote more competition
to bring down the rate of inflation in
health care cost without eroding health
care quality the government pays for
medicare and medicaid as you know and
that's very important secondly we've
added a million more children to the
ranks of the insurance for the medicaid
program we have protected 25 million
people through the passage of the
kennedy kassebaum bill that said you
can't use your health insurance if you
change the odds or someone in your
family has been sick we just recently
ended those drive-by deliveries saying
people couldn't be kicked out of the
hospital by insurance companies and they
just have babies so this is that's a
good start in the next four years i want
to focus on your following things number
one add another million children to the
insured ranks through the medicaid
program number two keep working with the
states as we are now to add 2.2 million
more people to the insurance system
number three cover people who are
between jobs for up to six months that
could protect three million families
700,000 kids and number four make sure
we protect the integrity for the
medicare program in the medicaid program
and not do anything in cutting costs
which would cause hundreds of hospitals
to close this could have been the case
if the 270 billion
medicare cuts that i've vetoed had been
enacted into law well first let me say
there you go again mr president talk
about a medicare cut i've heard you say
this time after time i've heard you say
on one tv appearance of media made me do
it you're trying to defend your cut
which was not a cut either reduction
that growth the spending and we always
had at least the 7 you've said publicly
that is now three times the rate of
inflation we ought to cut the growth
twice the rate of inflation it's about
where we are now so let's stop talking
about cutting medicare and my economic
plan will increase at 39
don't forget what he tried to do with
health care 17 new taxes spend 1.5
trillion dollars 50 new bureaucracies
and you believe that you couldn't have
been a cardiologist because he had
quotas yet couldn't your cardiology
wouldn't affect you because somebody
wanted to be a cardiologist 10 years
from now you'd have to be certain you
complied with some of the rules in this
extreme medical plan the government is
going to take over for all americans
there are things we can do like the
kassebaum bill which contains many
provisions i authored cover pre-existing
that exist portability and there other
things we can do we still need to cover
about 20 million people and a lot of
children i don't have time in 36th
respond to fix all that but let me just
say the american hospital association
said that the budget i vetoed could have
closed 700 hospitals not me and on a per
person basis it did cut way below the
rate of inflation and medical cost but
the important thing is what are we going
to do now we need to help people who are
between jobs need to cover more kids we
need to provide more preventive care my
balanced budget covers mammograms for
ladies aren't women on medicare and also
gives respite care to the million-plus
families who have someone with
alzheimer's these things are paid for in
the balanced budget plan it'll move us
forward next question is for senator
dole from here yes sir
my name is jason milligan active-duty
military and a small business owner and
my question is what is your position on
closing the gap between military and
civilian pay scales jason i appreciate
that very much being a former military
man myself you know we have 17,000 men
and women today wearing our uniform they
received food stamps that shouldn't
happen in america we have men and women
wearing our uniform and substandard
housing it shouldn't happen in america
and it's time we take a look at the pay
scales did get a 3 increase this year
but that's not enough if we're going to
ask young men and young women to protect
us and defend us around the world and
we've had more deployments under this
administration any time in history 50
times we deployed troops around the
world every time you do that to take a
risk somebody you know maybe your son
maybe your grandson maybe somebody else
but i think anybody who wears uniform is
a great american member of vietnam
remember when people almost used to walk
across the street rather than have
contact to somebody who was in vietnam
that's all behind us now and it should
be behind us and the forgotten war the
korean war but i guess i can just answer
very plainly jason thank you for doing
what you're doing
america would you a debt of gratitude
can i ask you a question what kind of
what service are you in i've in the
united states navy circuit and what kind
of small business yeah i have an m way
business good for you let me say you've
said if you don't mention this i just
signed a bill that we got through
congress to increase the amount of pay
increase we could give for military
personnel and to make sure the pay
increase this year was above the rate of
inflation i also have presented to the
congress and they adopted a large
package of quality of life improvements
which are very important i spent a lot
of time talking to military families as
well as military members
all over the world and in bases all
across the united states and i became
convinced after talking to the families
and the personnel in uniform that we
needed to not only have the pay raise
but we needed to invest more in child
care housing and other things to support
families especially when their longer
deployments because of the downsizing of
the military so i we're gonna do better
and we'll do better still but this is a
commitment i think that all americans
share without regard to party okay i
don't disagree then the president said
except he waited four years to do these
things and my view is it ought to be
it'll be done on day one we'll start
working on on day one in the dole camp
administration this is important
we only have ten division now used to
have 18 we had twenty-five fighter wings
we're down to 13 we have 536 ships are
down to 336 ship
i mean we've cut defense spending too
much the first place the president told
you 92 he would cut it
67 bid and he cut 112 billion dollars so
we're right on the edge right now but
the last thing we ought to do is make
those who wear the uniform sacrifice
next question here for president clinton
yes ma'am here on the front row
president clinton my name is cecily
kelley yesterday after our vet said in
palestine that he thinks the key to
success in the middle east is the
commitment of americans would you as
president send american troops to israel
a the west bank as peacekeepers
let me just take two seconds of my time
because i'm the commander-in-chief to
respond to one thing that was said i
proposed to spend one point six trillion
dollars on defense between now in the
year 2002 and there's less than 1
difference between my budget and the
republican budget on defense now on the
middle east as you know i work very hard
for peace in the middle east the
agreement between the palestinians and
israelis was signed at the white house
and the agreement the peace treaty with
jordan i was went to jordan to sign that
to be there but and i think the united
states can do whatever we reasonably can
i can say this i do not believe yasser
arafat wants us to send troops to the
west bank
we've never been asked to send troops to
i saw the agreement that prime minister
ravine and yasser arafat signed on the
west bank
it had 26 separate maps they had to sign
literally thousands of delineations of
who would do what on the west bank and i
believe if the parties will get together
and in a good-faith manner make that
agreement that they'll be able to do it
if we cannot impose a peace on the
middle east my position has always been
that the job the united states was to
minimize the risks of peace
you know if they asked me to be part of
some monitoring force as we are in the
sinai and have been since 1978 to
monitor the peace between egypt and
israel frankly i would have to think
about it i'd have to see what they
wanted to do but i don't believe that
will be the request i think what mr
arafat wants us to do is to make sure
that everybody honors the agreements
they've already made that's why i
brought the leaders to washington a few
days ago i think they will and i think
we'll get there don't be too discouraged
let me jason come back to you a minute
because there is a big difference at the
defense budget we had 7 billion this
year and 10 billion more than the
president he puts his money in the
out-years even if he were reelected you
know he'd be gone before anything
happened and nothing's gonna happen
because we don't have modernization now
if we don't build more b-2 bombers in
california we lost about 500,000 jobs
out in california because of this
devastation he big cuts we had to make
cuts didn't that make the cuts the
president promised do you make a need
and so i think we need to go back and
take a look we're increasing defense
reasonably not too much we are
increasing defense some because we want
to be prepared in case somebody here
gets called up jason i would say i
didn't hear what i say or if i had to
say but i don't want to you know i think
foreign policy i mean when they're very
careful about i'm not here to argue
about the president of some ongoing
foreign policy matter what i want the
president do i think he may have done it
this last statement call for an
unconditional end of the violence and
have the parties keep on talking as they
should talk and have a resolution the
last thing we want to do is commit more
forces anywhere but let's sort of keep
this out of politics because it's pretty
dicey right now when the change of
government occurred in israel the people
of israel were saying we don't want to
abandon the peace process we want more
security then a lot of mutual distrust
developed a lot of things happened which
maybe shouldn't have happened
when i asked yasser arafat and prime
minister netanyahu to come to washington
and got them together and they talked
alone for three hours i was convinced
that they had to have a chance to make
that peace again i'd say if they asked
us to play some reasonable role i don't
know how would respond it would depend
entirely on what they asked us to do but
the real secret there is for them to
abide by the agreements they've made and
find a way to trust each other and
they're gonna have to spend some time
and trust each other
prime minister rabine gave his life
believing that that trust could be
materialized and i still think it can be
all right next question from this
section and it is for senator dole back
in the back yes sir right there yes sir
well i start to go oscar don't go to
oscar oh ex-smoker for 30 years
tip three but they're just going oh it's
a pact plus a day man okay you mentioned
a statement you said some time ago that
you didn't take nicotine was addictive
would you care to are you still hold to
that statement or do you wish to recant
or explain yourself oh that that's very
my record going back to 1965 and the
congress the first vote we had was
whether or not you should put a little
notice on cigarettes they maybe deign
about it i voted for everything since
that time in fact 1992 we had a bill
come before us that all the states had
to comply are they going to lose certain
money we sent it to the clinton
administration for implementation they
waited three and a half years and during
that period about 3,000 young kids every
day started smoking so you added up
that's about three million not until
again 1996
i don't want anybody to smoke my brother
probably died part of because of
cigarettes i was asked a technical
question are they addictive maybe
they're the probably are dick i don't
know i'm not a doctor you shouldn't
smoke you got to be glad you quit oscar
30 years yeah and it seems to me that
what we need to do is to talk about not
only tobacco but drugs because drug use
12 and 17 years was doubled in this
administration the last 44 months
marijuana uses up one hundred and
forty-one percent cocaine use up a
hundred and sixty percent they're your
kids it's all happening this
administration because they cut funding
and they cut interdiction when i'm
president on the states we're gonna use
the national guard and whatever sources
we need to stop some of the drugs coming
into america if you stop the drugs
nobody's gonna use the drugs so don't
smoke don't drink don't use drugs just
don't do it
oscar the the question of what the
federal government should do to limit
the access of tobacco to young people is
one of the biggest difference between
senator dole indeed we did proposed a
regulation six months after i became
president under the law he mentioned it
simply says all these states have made
it illegal for kids to smoke now they
have to try harder if they want to keep
getting federal funds then we took
comments as we always do and there were
tens of thousands of comments about how
we ought to do it that's what drug it
out meanwhile we started also a 93 to
look into whether cigarettes were
addictive enough for the
federal food and drug administration to
ban the ability of cigarette companies
to advertise market and distribute
tobacco products to our kids no
president had ever taken on the tobacco
lobby before i did senator dole opposed
me he went down and made a speech to
people who were on his side saying that
i did the wrong thing i think i did the
right thing
on drugs i have repeatedly said drugs is
wrong and illegal and can kill you we
have strengthen enforcement everybody in
san diego knows we strengthened control
of the border we've done a lot more i
hope you get a chance to talk about it
well they also know if they live in san
diego mr pres if your car was 125
pounds of marijuana or less you go back
to mexico
you're not prosecuted you have a us
attorney here that sends it back home so
i think that's pretty important that's a
lot of marijuana that's a big supply but
don't you know don't get into this
smokescreen or oscar the president in
the election year decided well i ought
to do something i'd do anything on drugs
i've been awol for 44 months so let's
take arm smoking but see they haven't
even done it they haven't said what's
gonna happen whether they're gonna have
it declared addictive it's gonna apply
just once it's a drug does apply only to
teenagers with everybody in america
nobody should smoke young or old but
particularly young people should not
smoke and my record is there it's been
there i voted eight ten times since 1965
next question is for president clinton
it comes up right here yes sir president
clinton my name is jack flack i'm a
retired air force pilot sir it's
officially forecast that our annual
medicare and social security delicate
deficits are measured in the trillions
of dollars next century think about who
you listen to social security bankrupt
in either 2025 or 2030 i feel it's a
grossly unfair especially to our younger
generations who are losing faith in the
system my question is this assuming you
agree that our entitlement programs are
on an unsustainable course what specific
reforms do you propose first of all
there are two different things social
security and medicare are entirely
different in terms of the financial
stability let's talk about them
separately social security is stable
until as you pointed out at least the
third decade of the next century but
we'd like to have a social security fund
that has about 70 years of life instead
of about 30 years of life what we have
to do is simply to make some adjustments
to take account of the fact that the
baby boomers people like me are bigger
in number and the people that went just
before us and the people that come just
after us and i think what will plainly
do is what we did in 1983 when senator
dole serve and this is something i think
he did a good job on he served on the
social security commission and they made
some modest changes in social security
to make sure that it would be alive and
well into the 21st century and we will
do that that it's obvious that there are
certain things that have to be done and
there are 50 or 60 different options and
bipartisan commission to take it out of
politics we'll make recommendations and
build support for the people medicare is
different medicare needs help now i have
proposed the budget which would put ten
years on the life of the medicare trust
fund it's more than it's had a lot of
the time for the last 20 years it would
save a lot of money through more managed
care but giving more options more
preventive care and lowering the
inflation rate and the prices were
playing providers without having the
kind of big premium increases and
out-of-pocket costs that the budget i
vetoed would provide then that will give
us 10 years to do with medicare what
we're going to do with social security
have a bipartisan group look at what we
have to do to save it when the baby
boomers retire but now we can we ought
to pass this budget now and put ten
years on it right away so no one has to
worry about it well again that you know
if you're somebody thinking about the
future i think it's fair to say that
it'll be we'll work it out i mean this
is a political year and the president's
playing politics with medicare but after
this year is over we'll resolve it just
as we did as social security in 1983
it's a nonpartisan commission ronald
reagan got together tip o'neill and
howard baker two republicans one
democrat important commission i was on
that commission we resolved we rescued
social security we suggest that i think
then over a year ago now we do the same
with medicare and the white house called
it a gimme that last week i guess what
donna she later said well we'll cut
medicare a hundred billion and appointed
you'll probably have to be done by a
commission take it out of politics i
think a barbara's senior center not be a
little fed up with all these ads scaring
seniors scaring veterans and scaring
students about education well you don't
have any ideas you don't have any agenda
and all you have is fear that's all you
can use we have ideas in the dole camp
campaign and we'll rescue medicare as we
did social security their idea was to
have the poorest seniors in the country
pay 270 dollars more a year this year
their idea was to budget that that
american hospital association said could
close 700 hospitals their idea was to
charge everybody more out-of-pocket cost
in their budget that i vetoed not in an
election year sir i told him in early 95
senator dole said 30 years ago he was
one of 12 people that voted against
medicare and he was proud of it a year
ago he said i was right then i knew it
wouldn't work american seniors have the
highest life expectancy in the world we
need to reform it not wreck it
next question from here and it's for
senator dole yes ma'am right here yes
senator dole my name is suzanne gonzalez
and i would like to know what you are
got what would be your first step in
reforming welfare well we've taken the
first step took it three steps twice we
sent welfare reforms of president and he
vetoed it on a third time we said
welfare reform freddie signed it but
announced he would change it next year
and the vice president said they were
gonna do something else through the
line-item veto which i've never
understood but that sort of inside
baseball what we need to do is make
certain we try to return people to work
and i'm standing here as someone who a
long time ago as the county attorney in
russell kansas one of our jobs every
month this could do all the welfare
checks and sign them and three of those
checks were my grandparents so i know
what it's like to have to look welfare
obviously some people are gonna need
help this is united states of america
you're not gonna go without food and
you're not gonna go without medical care
this is america but at the same time if
you want to get off medicare get back in
the mainstream we're gonna provide jobs
we're gonna say you have a five
five-year limit you can be on welfare
you've got two years to look for a job
we provided more money for daycare in
the bill that passed the senate was
vetoed then it came back presents i'm
pretty much the same bill but this is an
important issue i don't think we ought
to be giving welfare payments to illegal
immigrants and it puts a heavy burden on
a state like except for emergencies
puts a heavy burden on states like
california cost california taxpayers
three billion dollars a year president
president don't get out of your way here
it's illegal right now and has been for
years for illegal immigrants to get
welfare benefits let me say that this is
one of the most important issues in the
world of me i started working on welfare
reform in 1980 because i was sick of
seeing people trapped in a system that
was increasingly physically isolating
them and making their kids more
vulnerable to get in trouble so i've
been working on it when i was a governor
for a long time when i became president
i used the authority i had in this law
to get out from under certain federal
rules to help states move people to work
we produced the welfare rolls by two
million already now i've got a plan with
this new welfare reform law to work with
the private sector to give employers
specific tax incentives to hire people
off welfare and to do some other things
which will create more jobs in the
private sector at least a million to
move more people from welfare to work
it's very important and i hope we get a
chance to talk about this more there's
not a more important issue i i still
remember a woman that i met ten years
ago who said she want to get off welfare
so her kids could tell give an answer
when they say what does your mother do
for a job i met that woman again she's
got four kids one's got a good job one
study to be a doctor ones in technical
school ones an honor student in high
school i want to make more people like
that woman really hardened so i've got a
plan to do it and it's just beginning
well another thing we can do we talk
about growth we've got a great economic
package which i hope we'll discuss later
across the board tax cut child credits
five and a dollar per child under 18
reduce the capital gains rate create
more jobs and opportunities for people
on and off welfare
we have other provisions less litigation
the trial lawyers big supporters of the
president the trial lawyers of course
they like lawsuit so every time they
have a bill that they want veto the
president vetoes it for them we've got
to understand in america that we've got
to have growth create more jobs and more
opportunities in the private sector the
president takes credit for all these
people off welfare
the governor's did that federal
government doesn't do that and the
government doesn't create jobs they're
created in the private sector this
section question yes ma'am on the back
row this for the president my name is
pamela johnson and i'm a landlord my
question is does your party have any
future plans to reduce the capital gains
tax especially for retired americans
first of all we have a big plan to
reduce the capital gains tax when people
sell their homes part of my tax package
which is paid for in my balanced budget
plan would exempt up to a half a million
dollars in gains from people when they
sell their homes which i think is the
biggest capital gains benefit we could
give to most ordinary americans we also
have capital gains now for people that
invest in new small businesses and hold
the investment for five years that was
part of our other economic plan and
these are things i think that will go a
long way toward helping america build a
stronger economy and a better tax system
i think the most important thing to
emphasize though is that we also have to
help people in other ways to build a
strong economy and we can't have any tax
cut that's not paid for one of the big
differences between senator dole and
myself is that i told you how i'm gonna
pay for every penny of the tax cuts i
recommend we worked hard to bring this
deficit down and that's helped people in
the real estate business because the
interest rates are lower we've got home
ownership at a 15-year high we've got
this country going in the right
so we can have a tax cut but my priority
would be to help the families who need
it with child-rearing and education and
buying a first-time home and helping for
health care costs so from your business
helping and buying the first-time home
exempting the capital gains on the sale
of a home would be the most important
things that you asked about thank you
no family with what the president tell
you at all is tax cuts expire at the
year 2000 but all these increases go on
that's the liberal approach you know
give you a little tax cut give you a
couple of years and make the tax
increases go on forever so the net tax
increase in his plans somewhere between
60 and 80 billion dollars we have in the
dole kemp economic plan unless you have
homes worth over $500,000 and it is your
appreciated congratulate you but in any
event no tax and that it's a good idea
they saw they picked it up and put it in
there but it's only temporary ours is
permanent ours is a good plan create
jobs and opportunities capital gains
rate cut it in half but at the 28
percent to 14 percent there are 7
trillion dollars in assets locked up in
america if we cut the capital gains rate
i'm told every day a letter from a
former constituent in kansas saying i
want to sell property in california put
it my business kansas i can't because
the capital gains rates too high we need
to get the economy going
that'll help social security that'll
create more jobs that help people want
to get off welfare it's the american way
before senator dole left the senate he
and mr gingrich also are recommending
that we passed these tax cuts only and
suppose we could pay for them and we all
assume that the tax cuts will be
permanent but we have to prove we can
pay for them after he left the senate we
abandoned that that's why most experts
say that this tax scheme will blow a
huge hole in the deficit raise interest
rates and weaken the economy and that
will take away all the benefits of the
tax cut with a weaker economy that's why
we have to balance the budget and i'll
tell you how i'm going to pay for
anything i promise you line by line you
should expect that from both of us all
right the next question is for senator
dole and yes ma'am right there
my name is melissa lodi and i'm a
third-year student at uc san diego and i
just want to say that it's a great honor
representing the voices of america my
voice my question is concerning you mr
dahle um all the controversy regarding
your age how do you feel you can respond
to the young voices of america today and
tomorrow well i think age is very you
know wisdom comes from age experience
and intelligence and if you have some of
each and i have some age some experience
some intelligence that adds up the
wisdom i think it also is a strength
it's an advantage and i have a lot of
young people work in my office working
my campaign this is about america this
about somebody said earlier one of the
first questions we're we're together
there's one american one nation i'm
looking at our economic plan because i'm
concerned about the future for young
people i'm looking about drugs presents
been awol for four years i'm looking
about crime he'll claim credit now for
crime going down but it happens because
mayors and governors and others have
brought crime down rudy giuliani mayor
of new york brought crime down 25
percent just in new york city of course
the president take credit for that my
view is we want to find jobs and
opportunities and education this year
the republican congress as far as
student loans went from twenty four
billion to thirty six billion over the
next six years a 50 increase the
highest appropriation ever six billion
dollars for pell grants very very
important we also raise the amount of
each pell grant in our economic plan the
$500 child credit can be used for young
people rolled over and over and over
your course not this age but if you have
a child two years old 7 interest be
worth about $18,000 time that child was
ready for college i can only tell you
that i don't think senator bill was too
old to be president it's the the age of
his ideas that i questioned
you're almost not old enough to remember
this but we've tried this before
promising people an election year tax
cut that's not paid for
we try to last time your ad telling you
can have everything you got and so let
me just say this did you hear him say
that congress just voted to increase
student loans and scholarships they did
after he left the last budget he led cut
pell grants cut student loans i vetoed
it when they shut the government down my
plan would give students a
dollar-for-dollar reduction for the cost
of a typical community college tuition a
$10,000 deduction a year for the cost of
college tuition would let families save
in an ira and withdraw tax-free to pay
for the cost of education and it's all
paid for my whole administration is
about your future it's about what the
21st century is gonna be like for you
and i hope you'll look at the ideas in
it thank you
welman you don't have any ideas i guess
you say the other person's ideas are old
as i said early they don't have any
ideas their ideas as raised taxes and
spend more money that's the liberal
philosophy that's what you like you've
got a perfect candidate
president clinton came to california in
1992 he said the centerpiece in my first
four years gonna be a middle class tax
cut now all you got that tax cut
congratulations cuz you got a big tax
increase you got a 265 billion dollar
tax increase and he stands here and says
politicians who make promises like that
ought to be ignored well he made the
promise i keep my word and you'll have a
tax cut it'll help you in whatever
you're gonna do next few years thank you
thanks questions for president clinton
and it's from the yes ma'am yes
hello my name is tracy sanders and my
question is do you feel that america has
grown enough and has educated it's a
fitness to totally cut out affirmative
action no ma'am i don't i am against
quotas i'm against giving anybody any
kind of preference for something they're
not qualified for but because i still
believe that there is some
discrimination and that not everybody
has an opportunity to prove they're
qualified i favor the right kind of
affirmative action i've done more to
eliminate programs and rate affirmative
action problems i didn't think was fair
and to tighten others up and my
predecessors have since the formative
actions been around but i have also
worked hard to give people a chance to
prove that they are qualified let me
just give you some examples we've we've
doubled the number of loans from the
small business administration triple the
number of loans to women businesspeople
no one unqualified everybody had to meet
the standards we've opened 260,000 new
jobs in the military to women since i've
been president but the joint chiefs say
we're stronger and more confident than
solid than ever and let me give you
another example of what i mean for me
affirmative action is making that extra
effort it's sort of like what senator
dole did when he sponsored the americans
with disabilities act and said to
certain stores ok you got to make it
accessible to people in wheelchairs
we weren't guaranteeing anything anybody
anything except the chance to prove they
were qualified the chance to prove that
they could do it and that's why i must
say i agree with general colin powell
that we're not there yet we ought to
keep making those extra effort
affirmative action programs the law and
the policy of the land senator dole well
we may not be there yet but we're not
gonna get there by giving preferences
and quotas as i supported that route for
some time and again i think it's back to
experience the lay experience will age a
little intelligence and i noticed that
nobody was really benefiting except a
very small group at the top the average
person wasn't benefiting people who had
the money were benefiting people got all
the jobs were benefiting
it seems to me that we ought to support
the california civil rights initiative
it ought to be not based on gender or
ethnicity or color or disability i'm
disabled i shouldn't have a preference i
would like to have one in this race come
to think of it but i don't get what they
do we can work that out i get 10 points
this is america no discrimination
discrimination ought to be punished but
there ought to be equal opportunity to
reach out and make certain everybody has
a chance participate equal opportunity
but we cannot guarantee equal results in
america that's not how america became
the greatest country on the face of the
earth i mean i have never supported
quotas i've always been against don't
favor equal results but i do favori
making sure everybody has a chance to
prove their confidence the reason i have
opposed that initiatives is because i'm
afraid it will end those extra effort
programs again i say think of the
americans with disabilities act make an
effort to put a ramp up there so someone
in a wheelchair can get up you don't
guarantee that they get the job you
guarantee they have a chance to prove
their competence and as i said this is
not a part of the thing with me general
powell colin powell said the same thing
he fair fears that the initiative would
take away the extra effort programs no
preference is too unqualified people no
quotas but don't give up i'll make it an
extra effort to you sure everybody has a
chance to prove they're qualified all
right the next question is for senator
dole and it comes from this section
right here of the back row there on the
blue shirt
yes sir i'm tim david i'm a mechanical
engineer senator dole how do you reduce
taxes and balance the budget well i'm
glad you add what's your first name
i first want to say the president didn't
quite give you all the stuff on the on
quotas because the justice department
entered what we called the piscataway
case up in new jersey it's pretty clear
that was a quota case and just because
one teacher with white one teacher was
black they had the same qualifications
you know they decided who would stay
there it shouldn't be that way now the
president would say well he wants to
mend it not ended 100 to 68 federal
programs that allow quotas he ended one
now this economic package tim i'm glad
you asked because you look like the type
that might be able to benefit from a 15
percent across-the-board tax cut and
$500 per child tax credit or no estate
tax relief but you're not interested in
right now but capital gains rate
reduction if you're taken care of
parents you get $1,000 deduction we
think that's very important because a
lot of people take care of their parents
how do we pay for it
gonna have a constitutional amendment to
balance the budget which the president
opposed and defeated you twisted arms
got six democrats to vote with him we
lost by one vote we're gonna balance the
budget by the year 2002 the president
wants to spend 20 more of the next six
years i want to spend 14 more and give
that 6 back to the people remember it's
your money it's not his money and it's
not my money it's your money and you
shouldn't have to apologize for wanting
to keep all you can of it but he ought
to apologize but want me to take more
and more he wants to give you sort of a
government tax cut it really doesn't
mean anything you know one of the
responsibilities of growing over it
seems to me is being able to tell people
something they may not want to hear just
because it's truth when they had a 250
billion dollar tax scheme that is half
the size of this one this one's 550 they
passed a budget that had 270 billion
dollars in medicare cuts the first
education cuts in history cut
environmental enforcement by 25 percent
took away the guarantee of quality
standards and nursing homes took away
the guarantee of health care to folks
with disabilities don't take my word for
this the economist magazine polled lots
of economists seven nobel prize winners
have said if this tax scheme passes it
will require huge cuts 40 in the
environment and law enforcement and
education will require bigger cuts in
medicare than that vetoed last time my
targeted tax cut gives tax cuts for
education child rearing buying a
first-time home paying for health care
costs and it's paid for and i told you
how i'll pay for it he won't tell you
because he can't your targeted tax cut
misprint never hits anybody that's the
problem nobody ever gets it but i i i
must say i'm a little offended by this
word scheme
talk about last time you talk about a
risky scheme and then vice president
gore repeated about 10 times in st
petersburg if i have anything in politic
that's my word my colleagues democrats
and republicans will tell you the bob
dole kept his word i'm gonna keep my
word to you i'm gonna keep my word the
americans if we're gonna tax cut taxes
and balance a budget we're not gonna
touch medicare it's gonna grow 39 and
social security's gonna go 34 now the
president doesn't have any ideas so he's
out trashing arts this isn't gonna blow
a hole in the deficit he promised you a
tax cut in 1992 and if you got one sir
you oughta both point text questions for
the president yes sir right there white
my name is duane bernie's on the martial
arts instructor and our father um mr
president could you outline any plans
you have to expand the family leave act
thank you well first let me say that i
sign the family leave act it was my very
first bill and i'm very proud of it
because it symbolizes what i think we
ought to be doing i don't take credit
for all the good things that have
happened in america but i take credit
for what i've tried to do to work with
others to make good things happen most
important good things that happen in
america happen in families just about
every family i know main concern is how
am i going to succeed at work and still
do right by my children family and
medical leave has led 12 million
families take a little time off for the
birth of a child or a family illness
without losing their job i'd like to see
it expanded in two ways
i'd like to say you can also take a
little time off without losing your job
to go to a regular parent-teacher
conference or to go to a regular
doctor's appointment with a family
member i'd also like to see the overtime
laws changed so that we could have some
more flex times so that at the
discretion of the worker a worker if you
earn over time you could decide whether
you want that time to be taken in cash
or in time with your family if you've
got a family problem i never go anywhere
it seems like we're i don't meet
somebody who's benefited from the family
leave law in longview texas the other
day i met a woman who was almost in
tears because she's been able to keep
her job while spending time with her
had cancer one of the people who's here
with me today met a young woman in the
airport saying that her son just was
able to be at present at the birth of
his child because if the family leave
law so yes i think it should be expanded
we have to help people succeed at home
and it worked well 88 of the people the
president claims her 11 million have
already covered and only 5 keep in mind
only 5 of the employers were even
affected by family leave act we had a
better idea we didn't win we had a
better idea now we have a majority but
get a president that was a tax credit to
the employer instead of the federal
government reaching out we had a tax
credit pick up some of the cost because
the gap to our replacement worker that's
a cost this is a way it ought to work
give more power back to the states and
back to the people back to the taxpayers
not always the long arm of the federal
garp but keep in mind this bill covers
five percent of the employers ninety
five percent of the employers and all
those employees they employ are not
covered in this act and according to
investors daily which i read just a
couple of days ago eighty eight percent
the people he claims credit for were
already covered in collective bargaining
agreements rather booms we had family
leave in our office i'm certain as he my
friend senator mitchell yet family leave
i worked every day with people i spent a
lot of time in hospitals i know what
it's like to be in a hospital surely
want family leave there's a better way
to do it only have 30 seconds i can't
fix the statistics it covers the
majority of the workforce employers have
under 50 are exempted the bill
originally covered employers at 25 and
more but because of opposition we went
up to 50 senator dole led the opposition
to it he filibustered it he said it was
a mistake he said it would hurt the
economy we've had record numbers of new
small businesses and ten and a half
million jobs it didn't hurt the economy
he still believes it's a mistake i
believe it was right you can decide
which of us you think are right it's up
to you next question for senator
dullness i guess ma'am hi my name is
bridget gia nadia and i'm a wife and
mother of two sons from
girl's bed and my question for you
senator dole is and the wife of a san
diego business owner i see one of our
biggest problems in the u.s does not
manufacture enough of our own products
how would you help this problem out well
right we've lost three hundred and
fifty-seven thousand manufacturing jobs
and the bureau of labor statistics say
today said today that they made a
mistake is probably going to be much
much higher figures over talked about
all these new jobs we've better wait and
see what the results are
we're gonna do that with a more
aggressive trade policy we're gonna do
that with an economic package we're
gonna do that with regulatory reform you
know regulations cost the average family
right here democrat a republican about
seven thousand dollars a year seven
thousand it's a like attack a lot of
people out of this i meant a lady in
colorado springs about seven weeks ago
now she had a small business with sixty
three employees she finally gave it up
why because of paperwork and regulation
congress passed a paperwork reduction
act the president exempts the irs which
creates three-fourths of paperwork
we're gonna have regulatory we're gonna
have litigation reform you know i felt
off the platform of california chico
while back before i hit the ground my
cell phone rang and this trial lawyer
says i think we got a case here you know
we gotta stop some of these frivolous
lawsuits they're putting people out of
business men and women get the economy
going cut the capital gains rate create
more jobs and opportunities for
everybody in america that's what we will
do and my word is good i keep my
promises i don't break my promises that
the election and i don't make new
promises on an election year we're gonna
get it done
we're gonna grow some of these jobs in
america because we need to get it
they're going the wrong way
let's look at the facts we lost a lot of
manufacturing jobs in the 12 years
before i became president we have gained
manufacturing jobs since i've been
president we've negotiated over 200
separate trade agreements exodus just a
california in california we made 37
billion dollars worth of
telecommunications equipment eligible
for exports for the first time
we're selling everything from from
telephones to cds to rice in japan we're
selling american automobiles in japan
now i visited the chrysler dealership in
japan we're number one in automobile
manufacturing production and sales
around the world again for the first
time since the 1970s why because we've
had tough aggressive trade policies and
because we got interest rates down and
we had a good stable economic policy
because we've reduced the deficit four
years in a row for the first time in the
twentieth century that the president's
done that in all four years and that's
why i don't want to see us blow a big
hole in the deficit with a tax problem
we can't pay for so your interest rates
will go up and you'll have to pay back
in higher interest rates what you
allegedly will get in a tax cut so i say
keep working on expanding the markets
more than half of these ten a half
million new jobs are in higher wage
areas and we'll have more manufacturing
and more sales at home and around the
world well you may think the biggest
employer in america is general motors
but i got news for you its manpower
services hiring people temporarily have
lost their jobs they go to work for 30
days or 60 days that's a good economy i
don't think so they're setting new
records this year we have the worst
economy in a sense we had the slowest
growth about 2.5 percent the president
heard a growth of over 5 we don't have
the s&l crisis anymore republicans to
cut fifty three billion dollars in
spending that's why the budget couldn't
get look look good it didn't look too
good the first two years when we had a
democratic president and a democratic
congress next question is for president
clinton yes sir i'm bob goldfarb i'm a
travel agent and can you please explain
your policy on the employment
non-discrimination act that would have
prohibited discrimination would have
prohibited people from being fired from
their jobs simply for being gay or
lesbian i'm for it that's my policy i'm
for it i believe that any law-abiding
taxpaying citizen who shows up in the
morning and doesn't break the law and
doesn't interfere with his or her
neighbor's ought to have the ability to
work in our country and shouldn't be
subject to unfair discrimination i'm for
now i have a little time left so let me
just say that i get attacked so many
times on these questions it's hard to
answer all those things in february
senator dole just said we had the worst
economy in the century in february he
said we had the best economy in 30 years
just february and i don't want to
respond in kind to all these things i
could i could answer a lot of these
things tit for tat but i hope we can
talk about what we're gonna do in the
future no attack ever created a job or
educated a child or help the family make
ends meet no insult ever cleaned up the
toxic waste dump or help an elderly
person now for four years that's what i
worked on do you'll give me four years
more i'll work on it some more i'll try
to answer these charges but i prefer to
emphasize direct answers to the future
and i gave you a direct answer senator
dome so i'm opposed to discrimination in
any form but i'm but adult favor
creating special rights for any group
that would be my answer to this question
and i'm you know the be special rights
for different different groups in
america but i'm totally opposed to
discrimination don't have any policy
against hiring anyone whether there's
lifestyle or whatever we don't have any
policy that can never have had in my
office will we have in the future but as
far as special rights i'm opposed to
same-sex marriages which the president
signed while after midnight one morning
the dark a night
opposed it but i'll get back to the
economic package because again i think
this is very important because anything
is gonna change america just get the
economy to grow the president heard a
good economy sure yesterday of crisis
enter we're selling assets got a
republican congress cutting spending
finally and he said be that best four
years ever that's not true we had a loan
of 1.2 million bankruptcy who said in
that new record credit card debts never
been higher i just told you about this
manufacturing job loss which is going to
increase we need a good strong economic
package but the private sector create
the jobs and they can do it if if you
believe that the california connor
was better in 1992 than it is today
you should vote for bob dole i have
worked so hard out here to help turn
this economy around let me just give you
one tiny example in san diego where we
had some defense cutbacks we funded a
project with the university of
california san diego to use airplane
composite materials to build lighter
stronger bridges a little project in a
program that senator dole opposed and
that composite now is going to be built
around the bridges on the santa monica
freeway to help minimize the impact of
earthquakes and create more jobs that's
just one tiny example they will talk
about some more before it's over next
question is for senator dole is from
this section yes ma'am yep senator dole
i am berta stratus and i work in health
care and it's truly an honor to be here
like tonight to address both of you
being in health care we have talked a
little bit about health care tonight but
mainly medicare and medicare have been
mentioned but the private sector is a
problem managed care is taking over
especially in california and because of
that the quality of care is going
downhill there are many many people who
cannot get the tests that they need when
they need them and because of that they
are dying needlessly there are many many
more lawsuits being presented against
the managed care industry because of
this and i think it's a real problem
that needs to be addressed what would
you do if you were president well one
thing i did was to pose the government
take over health care the president
clinton offered in 1993 which created 17
new taxes and 50 new bureaucracies and
price controls because we were afraid to
the very thing you mentioned would have
happened everybody's gonna visit forced
into managed care
you couldn't have chosen your own doctor
and that would have been the end and i
think right now we got to go back i know
they've appointed a commission take a
look at
managed-care maybe that's part of the
answer but it seems to me if we start to
take choices away from people if we
drive them into one type care if we
eliminate fee-for-service altogether or
eliminate fact you can go to your own
doc you've got to go somewhere else then
i think we've taken a giant step
backward in the united states of america
we have the best health care delivery
system in the world and we want to keep
it that way that's why we oppose the
government takeover health care plan the
president clinton tried and tried and
tried to get through congress didn't get
it done
woman end up we had more votes than he
had then they decided to pull the plug
it was a big big mistake now whether or
not he'll do that again i've heard some
of the people say well that's the model
we ought to use and if he's re-elected
maybe he'll come back and try it again i
hope not i hope not both cases but it
does seem to me that you've raised a
very important point that needs to be
addressed you're gonna have to watch it
gonna take a look and all the managed
care going on in california or we're
gonna end up losing our best carrot we
have in the world i'm just curious how
many of you are under managed care plan
raise your hands here to manage careful
young people here how many of you like
it well one of the things that i tried
to do was to make sure that everybody in
the country who was under a managed care
plan should at least have three choices
of plans and would have the right to get
out without penalty every year the best
not a government takeover that's like
the family medical leave law just tries
to set the rules of the game i'm
strongly in favor of a federal bill to
repeal the any gag rules on providers in
other words i believe that doctors
should not be able to be kicked out of
managed care plans just because they
tell the patients what they need and
what more expensive care options might
be if we're saving money and managing
resources better that's a good thing if
we're saving money and depriving people
of care
that's a bad thing a good place to start
is to say no managed care provider can
gag a doctor and kick the doctor out of
the managed care plan for the doctor
telling the patient you need them more
expensive tests you need a more
expensive procedure your health requires
no dough well i don't have any quarrel
with that i think that would help i
think what we want to avoid is falling
back into this nationalized health care
system of the president clinton want to
give us in 1993 that isn't a liberal
idea i've never heard 117 new taxes high
c-can't rolls 50 new bureaucracies we'd
have that trouble all over america we
need to deal with managed care it only
happened california is happening in
other states that we visit too it's a
national problem not just a state
the next question is for president
clinton and in this section yes ma'am
that's yes you're right i'd sort of like
the stack colleen o'connor i teach
history and political science at san
diego mesa college right up the road
here and i'd like to tee off from the
original question by another teacher and
speak for those people that aren't here
tonight 63 of the american people are
not participating that are eligible to
vote not even participating in the
process several parties can't even get
into the base the green party the reform
party the natural law party all of these
people have basically opted out of what
we're still participating in and if we
in fact they're going to bring the
country back together and be all faces
around the table the new american family
what do you see as something the
president can do to begin that process
to bring them back in
first of all i think it's important to
make voting more accessible that's why i
strongly supported the motor voter law
there was a big story i think in usa
today about the millions of people
who've now registered because of it
secondly i think we need to look at
making the elections more accessible you
know several states now are letting
people vote over three weeks a lot of
people are busy and it's hard for them
to to just get there and vote the third
thing i think we need is more forums
like this which is one of the reasons i
have so strongly supported campaign
finance reform because if you want to
cut the cost of campaigns you have to
open the airwaves
because what drives the cost of campaign
are the cost of advertising on
television radio newspaper mass mailings
and if you open the airway some more
things like this you see it's not just
you that are participating here for
every one of you who stood up going to
ask a question night i promise you
there's a hundred thousand american that
said i wish i could have asked that
question so i think we have to change
the nature of politics the last thing i
think we should do is something i've
been trying to do since i've been
president is every time i do something
is a in a public way i try to have a
real american citizen there who is
directly affected by it so that people
can see the connection of what happens
way across the country in washington
with more police on the street in san
diego clean up the sewage here in san
diego doubling the border guards here in
southern california that there is a
connection between what we do way back
there and what we do here those are my
best ideas
well i don't know of any perfect
solution i've been in politics for some
time and i worry about people who don't
vote and i wonder if it's our fault the
candidates fault people say i don't care
one vote doesn't make a difference i
give you hundreds of case you probably
gave me 200 cases where one vote made a
difference i know it made a lot of
difference many times in the congress
campaign finance might help might help
contributions coming in from india nisha
or other foreign countries rich people
in those countries then being sent back
after the la times discovers it two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars but
maybe there ought to be more debates i'd
be willing to have another debate this
year we're gonna fight all the
candidates and talk about the economy if
we don't get the economy to grow if we
don't cut taxes and give people child
credits and cut the capital gains rate
and get this economy growing we're gonna
limp into the next entry if we grow the
economy it's gonna help social security
can help jobs gonna help everything let
me make one other suggestion these
you're a teacher you can have an impact
in that one of the things i think that
really frustrates people is it's so
often political campaigns
seem to be a bore about the politicians
that are running than the people now
there is a connection and i think what
we have to do is convince people there's
a big difference if you vote one way you
will have a department of education in
the 21st century if you vote the other
way you won't if you vote one way you'll
have an expansion of family leave if you
vote the other way you'll be lucky to
save it but these are important
questions and people have to decide i
think that the american people also need
to be a little more responsible and
think about whether there's a connection
but in their lives and what we do in
washington for senator dole in this
section on the back row yes ma'am i'm
iris seaford and i'm unemployed iris
iris senator dole we talked about social
security for the baby boomers but
shouldn't we be saving and investing for
our own retire
as well are you planning any incentives
to encourage us to take care of
ourselves rather than to rely on the
government and on social security when
we retire well we have in our economic
fact individual retirement accounts
where we think it would encourage
savings you could also use those
accounts for health care or education or
first home we're doing that precisely
and i think one thing sooner or later
we're gonna have to consider to take a
look at the social security system and
because we get a lot of people are
advocating that well we don't want to
put our money into social security you
got to be very careful of that but that
you have to protect the people who are
already in the pipeline but something
might you might consider not suggestion
will be dumb at least we ought to look
at it but look why with chairman of the
finance committee which handles social
security we looked at all these options
and one thing we got to make certain
when i used to go and my mother would
tell me all i've got is my social
security don't touch it and we didn't
touch it we preserved it and i'm an
optimist your social security is gonna
be there when you retire we'll fix it
it'll probably happen in the year 2012
or 2015 in 1983 we thought we had a 75
year fix didn't work much much less but
at least we fixed it for some time in 37
to 40 million people get their checks on
time so we need to preserve the system
and we need to make it stronger but we
also need to look at some options
whether or not we do something what the
options are in fact they've got a
commission right now in congress a
bipartisan commission looking at all the
different options are gonna present to
the next congress so i think we wait to
see what they present take a look at our
side this is one where we have some
agreement i think only about half the
people in this country have pension
plans and social security is not enough
for a lot of people to live on or at
least it's not enough for them the main
thing anything like their previous
lifestyle so we've got to figure out how
are we gonna have more people with
pension plans and and pension coverage
has been declining as more and more
people work for small businesses and
fewer people work for big businesses so
what what is in my plan and i think it's
almost identical to what's in senator
doles plan is we
more people that are now eligible to
save in an ira and we let couples
married couples save more and then they
could withdraw from the tax-free if they
needed to for medical emergencies or to
buy a home or for an education but they
get also safe to supplement their
retirement in addition to that we just
passed a sweeping small business reform
that makes it easier for small business
people to take out 401k plans for
themselves and their employees and then
much easier for employees to carry it
from job to job
my best friend from grade school is a
computer software salesman and he told
me last time he changed the employers it
took nine months to figure out how to
transfer his 401k plan now none of that
will happen anymore and so i hope that
over the next 10 years you'd see a big
increase in the percentage of people
that have pension plans plus a secure
social security system did you say
you're unemployed the first thing i do
is get you a job and that's the economic
package you can create jobs and
opportunities reduce the capital gains
rate reduce regulatory reform stop some
of the senseless litigation and let
people work in america and i think that
that's the thrust we will make obviously
social security is a very important
program it should it'll be preserved
democrats or republicans or we want to
make certain we protect those in the
pipeline just we did back in 1983 and we
did it on a bipartisan basis we took it
out of politics people get so tired of
politics we ought to do the same with
medicare maybe we'd make a deal here
all right the questions for president
clinton does anybody have a foreign
affairs question in this section yes sir
good evening i'm michael smith i'm a
electronics technician in the navy my
question was how you plan to deal with
the trade deficit with japan let me tell
you what we have done we have concluded
with japan 21 about to be 22 trade
agreements now and since we did that in
the areas where we concluded trade
agreements our exports to japan have
gone up by 85 percent in the last four
years and our trade deficit which japan
has gone down until about five months
ago the japanese economy was in a deep
recession it's coming back now so they
can buy even more american products and
i think it'll go down more but i'm very
that's one of the real success stories
here of the work we've done
we're selling japanese rice from
california for the first time i visited
a chrysler dealership in tokyo i visited
a jeep plant the oldest auto plant in
america in toledo ohio where they're
going to export 41,000 right-hand-drive
jeeps this year and they've got 700 new
jobs because of it there is no easy way
to do this when you're dealing with the
economy that's traditionally been more
close and one that's traditionally been
more open you just have to gut it out
issue by issue issue we just we've
agreed in principle on an insurance
agreement and we're working on three or
four other areas now but that the way
you have to do it is make sure you're
competitive we're the most competitive
country in the world now and then
despite to open those markets and go try
to make the sale and that's what our
trade ambassador our commerce secretary
all the other people our administration
is trying to do well the bottom line is
we've got to stop exporting jobs we need
to keep jobs here i said there's 357,000
good job manufacturing jobs if you're
lost and i assume some of those because
of our trading partners we didn't have
access to their markets we ought to
insist on access if we don't have access
to their market the same way they've
access to our markets we also wait
that's enough time out
when you give us access we'll give you
access it's very hard to get into the
japanese market as everybody don't they
want to get into our market there's a
lot of automobiles here
create a lot of jobs those who sell
exports and it's very important to the
economy but i think we want to make
certain i supported the president's
trade policy so we've got to be more
aggressive once you have a policy then
you got to go out be aggressive and
enforce that policy there are american
jobs that are being lost this is what
ross perot complains about and i'd say
to the reform party take a look at the
republican party we're the reform party
and we're gonna make things better one
thing we're gonna do is stop exporting
jobs in america let me say again we've
had over 200 separate trade agreements
in the last four years by far the
largest number in american history not
just the big ones you've read about but
a lot of smaller ones and now what we
have to do is to focus on those things
were real good at and make sure we're
getting a fair deal we just had a pretty
serious dispute with china because they
were copying our cds and costing
thousands of jobs in places like
california so we had that we said you
know if you want to keep doing business
to sell your products over here it's
gonna have to quit pirating our cds then
they agreed to do a number of things and
let us verify that they've done it now
things are going to make the problem
much better but there is not a simple
easy answer you just have to work on
this day in and day out every month
every year every issue to make sure that
we have not only free trade but fair
trade i'm proud that we're better off on
that than we were four years ago all
right the next question is for senator
dole and it's in a second yes sir
ron kite minister i rather this great
nation has been established by the
founding fathers who possessed a very
strong christian beliefs in common
principles if elected president of the
united states what could you do to
return this nation to these basic
principles and also do you feel that
there's the president the office of the
president has the responsibility to set
the roads mindful to inspire our young
people well no doubt about it our
founding fathers had a great deal of
wisdom and in addition to what you
mentioned they also were concerned about
this all-powerful central government
washington dc to effect confiscate your
property so ike
carry around in my pocket i can't pull
it out i'd violate the rule a copy of
the 10th amendment which says that we
ought to return power to the states and
power to the people people here you
ought to make more decision without a
few or they honor duty and country
that's what america is all about
certainly the prize the united states in
the highest office in the world the most
important office in the world had the
responsibility young people we talked
about earlier to everyone by example and
when it comes to public ethics he has a
responsibility you have 30-some in your
administration movie their laps are
being investigated or in jail or
whatever then you've got an ethical
problem is public ethics not talking
about private we talk about public
ethics when you have 900 files gathered
up by some guy who was a bouncer in a
bar and hired his security officer to
collect files and watergate
i know person went to jail for looking
at one file one fbi file there 900
sequestered in the white house 900
people like you why should they be
rifling through your files so the
president has a great responsibility
that's one that i understand and desert
me carry out
this is the most religious great country
in history and yet interestingly enough
we have the most religious freedom of
any country in the world including the
freedom not to believe and now we have
all these people just up the road los
angeles county got people from 150
different racial and ethnic groups and
they got tons of different religions but
the fundamental tenants of virtually
every religion are the same and what i
tried to do is to support policies that
would respect religion and then help
parents inculcate those values to their
children let me very briefly give you
some examples one of my proudest moments
was signing the religious freedom
restoration act that says the
government's gotta bend over backwards
before we interfere with religious
practice so i changed the justice
department effort to get a church to pay
back a man's tithe because he was
bankrupt when he gave it i've supported
character education programs in our
schools drug-free schools programs i
supported giving parents of v-chip on
their television so if they don't want
their young kids to watch things they
shouldn't watch they wouldn't have to
that's the kind of thing we need to do
if people like you and our families the
power to give those values to our
children wow thank you
you know before i came in to know my
wife and daughter and i had a prayer is
it's god's will whatever whatever
happens god's will
we'll have a constitutional amendment
for voluntary prayer in school might be
would be a great idea i supported
president posey i mean it seems to me
the president whoever the president may
be this is one of his highest
responsibilities people look to the
president knighted states more than any
other person in america and that's why
it's always been and that's the way it
always will be all right this is our
last question it goes to president
clinton and it's from this section yes
my name is yvette doobie and i too am a
minister i'm with the universal
fellowship with metropolitan community
churches president clinton
perhaps you can help me with something
tonight i've heard mister dole say
several times all of us together and
when he was asked if he would support
equal rights and employment for gay and
lesbian people you said that you favored
that and he said that he did not believe
in special rights and i thought the
question was equal rights for all people
and i don't understand why people are
using the term special rights when the
question is equal rights could you help
me in understanding that i want to
answer your question but let me say one
other thing we don't need a
constitutional amendment for kids to
pray and what i did was to have the
justice department the education
department for the first time ever issue
a set of guidelines that we gave to
every school in america saying that
children could not be interfered with in
religious advocacy when they were
praying when they were doing whatever
they could do under the constitution
just because they were on a public
school ground and i think anyone who's
experienced this would tell you that our
administration has done more than any in
30 years to clarify the freedom of
religion in the public square including
in the public schools now i think i have
to let senator dole speak for himself it
wouldn't be fair for me to do that i
would wind up i mean it's the last
question i'd mischaracterized it to try
to make you happy let me tell you what i
feel we have a lot of differences in our
country and some of us believe that
other people's decisions are wrong even
immoral but under our constitution if
you show up tomorrow and obey the law
and you work hard and you do what you're
supposed to do you entitle the equal
treatment that's the way the system
works all over the world people are
being torn apart bosnia the middle east
northern ireland rwanda burundi you name
it because of all their differences we
still have some of that hatred inside us
you see it in the church burning and one
of the things i've tried harder
to do is to tell the american people
that we have to get beyond that we have
to understand it we're stronger when we
unite around shared values instead of
being divided our differences no no
don't well i hope i've made my answer
clearer that i'm opposed to
you know we've suffered discrimination
in the disability community there are 43
million of us and i can recall cases
where people that cross the street
rather than to meet somebody in a
wheelchair so we want to end
discrimination i think that answers
itself no discrimination america we've
made that clear and i would just say
that it seems to me that that's weight
ought to be we shouldn't discriminate
race color whatever lifestyle disability
this is america we're all proud of it
we're not there yet but we need a good
strong leadership going in the next
century i'm sorry we didn't have foreign
policy question because just this week
secretary christopher said well we
dooley didn't know much the first couple
of years about foreign policy now that
was quite an admission it underscores
that i had to say on the hartford debate
but there is really no foreign policy in
this administration is sort of ad-hoc
whatever comes up we'll deal with it
unfortunately didn't have more questions
on that
let me say again there is no more
important responsibility for the
president than to say if you believe in
the constitution the bill of rights and
the declaration of independence that's
all we need to know and you can be part
of our america and you can walk across
that bridge the 21st century with it and
we are not well sir when we attack each
other and a kind of an ad hominem way it
doesn't create jobs doesn't educate
children doesn't solve problems we need
to be venice agreeing on ideas honestly
and talking about the future the future
will be the greatest time in this
country's history if we can beat this
division that is the deviling the whole
rest of the world all right now we go to
the closing statement senator dole your
first two minutes sir so let me thank
everybody here university and jim thank
you all the people who may still be
watching or viewing this is what it's
all about not about me it's not about
president clinton it's about the process
it's about selecting a prezzie nighted
states so we have our differences we
should have our differences mentioned
other parties they have their
differences we all agree be pretty dull
plate we should have more debates maybe
we'll have another thing on the economy
but i would just say this this is the
highest honor i've ever had in my life
to think that somebody from russell
kansas somebody who grew up living in a
basement apartment somebody whose
parents didn't finish high school
somebody who spent about thirty nine
months in hospitals after world war two
somebody uses a button okay every day to
get dressed somebody who understands
that the real americans out there with
real problems whether soccer moms or the
sink single parents or families working
or seniors or people with disabilities
wherever it may be but there's some very
fundamental differences in this campaign
president clinton opposed his term
president clinton opposed his
constitution amendment to balance the
budget president clinton opposes
voluntary prayer amendment he opposes
amendment to protect the flag of the
united states of america people who give
their lives
a couple servicemen here they sacrifice
they give everything for america we
ought to protect the american flag with
a constitutional amendment but beyond
that we need to address the economy and
i would just save my time running out
here it's a very proud moment for me and
what i want the voters to do is to make
a decision and i want them to be proud
of their vote in the years that had
proud that they voted for the right
candidate proud that they voted
hopefully for me and i'll just make you
one promise my word is good democrats
republican the work that bob dole's word
is good i keep my word i promise you the
economy is gonna get better we're gonna
have a good economic package and we're
going into the next century
a better america thank you thank you
gentlemen thank you ladies and gentlemen
all the people who are watching one
thing i'd like to say is i agree with
what senator dole said it's a remarkable
thing in a country like ours that man
who grew up in russell kansas and one
who was born to a widowed mother and
hope arkansas could wind up running for
president could have a chance to serve
as president the first thing i want to
say is thank you for giving me the
chance to be president this election is
about two different visions about how we
should go into the 21st century would we
be better off as i believe working
together to give each other the tools we
need to make the most of our god-given
potential are we better off saying
you're on your own would we be better
off building that bridge to the future
together so we can all walk across it
are saying you can get across yourself
if you don't agree with this room with
anything else tonight and if the people
watching us don't leave with anything
else i hope you'll leave with this this
is a real important election the world
is changing dramatically and how we work
and how we live how we relate to each
huge changes and the decisions we make
will have enormous practical
consequences so we talked about our
responsibility tonight i want to talk
about your responsibilities and your
responsibilities you're responsible
to show up on november the fifth because
you're going to decide whether we're
going to balance the budget now but
protect medicare medicaid education in
the environment you'll decide whether
we're going to keep fighting crime with
the brady building assault weapons and
finish putting those hundred thousand
police whether we're going to move a
million people from welfare to work
whether we're going to give our families
more protection for their kids against
drugs and tobacco and gangs and guns
whether we're going to give our children
world class education where every
eight-year-old can read every 12 year
old can log in on the internet every
eighteen-year-old go to college if we do
those things
we'll build that base of the 21st
century and the greatest country in
history will be even greater thank you
thank you senator thank you mr
this concludes the this is the last of
the three 1996 presidential and vice
no doubt these two public servants are
breathing easier now watching this
debate as you weren't as we were here at
cnn they're just inside the hall is
senior dole adviser charles black and
democratic strategist paul begala
charles black how do you think your man
did tonight
fantasy jews began
paul begala howdy this your man gave
tonight thank you bernie and tell you
that i think that the president won he
talked about his accomplishments in
office he talked about his agenda for
the future most importantly he talked to
the audience and with the audience with
senator dole
very often was not connecting with the
folks here in the audience and the
president was and i think that's the
bottom line of this debate okay i think
we were having an audio problem charles
block when you were speaking the
background was just a bit loud you
maintained a pause for bob dole to drown
me out well i just want to be sure that
our viewers know that in terms of your
your statement
you've maintained that senator dole and
your words dominated the debate tonight
and then you claim that the president
was put on the defense he was smuggling
uptight all about to say that again he
was on the defensive and he was smug and
uptight all right was he paul begala
well no i sir i hope the braves don't
have as many swings and misses and
strikeouts as charlie and his canada are
having tonight this was a terrific
debate for the president because it was
about real people and their lives and
their issues and the things that they
care about senator dole tried very hard
to be the hatchet man but in the year
the soccer mom that just doesn't work
and the audience shut him down on that
and as clearly win for the president
do you think voters received information
tonight that they hadn't had before in
assisting them in deciding whom they
know that he needed done and my guess is
the answer to that question is no we
heard a lot of these these statements
that we heard tonight before i might say
we heard about that bridge to the 21st
century a good fair tonight from the
president but dough did get in a few
little digs here and there but this is
not a place to really go on some strong
attack you said peters easy demeanor of
the crowd was such that it would have
been in some ways disrespectful to them
to do that george will is with us here
in washington oh sorry here in new york
this evening where he used to have been
on other business towards your first
impression well the president took his
strategy regarding bob dole's attacks
from the bible met proverbs chapter 15
verse 1 a soft answer turneth away wrath
and indeed it did and he simply be fused
that he did it masterfully peter i have
to say what struck me most as i do not
believe bob dole understands his own
positions he gave the most garbled
explanation of the piscataway
affirmative action case and when he got
to affirmative action the burning issue
in california thanks to the california
civil rights initiative which is running
ahead of bob dole i guarantee you in
every congressional district in the
state he simply did not make the
relevant distinction between affirmative
action and racial preferences and so it
never has a man made less out of more
ammunition well california is a terribly
important to senator dole at the moment
and whether or not he's making a feint
in that direction this week are going to
make a serious major effort there we'll
come back and talk about but one more
first impression before we take a brief
break from our white house correspondent
brit hume who is out on the road in san
diego tonight with the clinton campaign
brit it's pretty clear peter that this
went just about the way the white house
and the president had hoped it would he
was subject to relentless attack in the
debate preparations from george mitchell
the former senator playing the role of
bob dole and was coached all the way not
to respond to any of it and indeed
tonight he did not and the white house
is bet on this format part of the big
negotiating point the clinton
administration made in the beginning was
to have this be this format for the
second debate and the result was that
they got the kind of audience they
expected and the kinds of questions from
that audience that they expected and
they did not include any of the
questions along the lines of the dole
attacks and the president felt he had no
need to reply and did not we're gonna go
on to thanks but we're gonna go on with
us in a while both you and cokie taking
note of this audience reminding me that
very often in these town meetings we
find people asking questions on a much
broader range of subjects than we in the
press do and sometimes it's even
embarrassing to some members of the
press to hear how much more engaged on a
broad range of subjects the public or
this particular group of citizens is
than the press sometimes is which can be
relentless on a given subject as for as
for the debates this was the last one is
jim lehrer reminded this though senator
dole fished a few times there the
clinton campaign has made it very clear
from the very beginning they were not
gonna have any debates after october the
16th former president ford there in the
cheering section for senator dole we'll
be back in just a moment
abc news live coverage of the second
presidential debates will continue after
this from our abc stations
tonight on newschannel 5 at 11:00
what does it take to be a police officer
made into the schedule here he badly
needs to get some new lever back into
the end of the game and even ross perot
would just help him get attention at
this point bob dole faces a difficult
two and a half weeks without the debate
i can't imagine the clinton people want
to go for this i'm bob bill's best
moment tonight in your opinion
i thought his best moment early on was
when he came at the moral issue and the
first couple of times he emphasized that
he was somebody that could be trusted
about the fifth or sixth time i thought
that was too much repeated to have the
effect it had the first couple of times
and his worst moment what i'm not
certain there was a worse moment because
i think his worst moments were in the
first debate me he looked better this
time but there are occasions when he
just drops into dole speak these
uncomfortable sentences and it looks old
and that's a weakness president